Module 1 What is FinTech?

"FinTech involves the use of technology, particularly information technology to transform the way that finance is being done in global markets, developing countries, and across start-ups and tech firms." - Douglas Arner

1.1 Module 1 Introduction
Welcome, my name is Douglas Arner and this is an introduction to FinTech. I am the Kerry Holdings Professor in Law at the University of Hong Kong and I have spent the past 25 years studying the interaction between finance, technology and regulation. And in this course, we are going to provide you an introduction to the world of FinTech. Financial technology transforming the world of finance and the wider world beyond faster than we have ever seen before. In this course, I am joined with a group of my friends from around the world, Ross Buckley of the University of New South Wales in Australia, Henri Arslanian of PwC, Brian Tang of the Asia Capital Markets Institute, Janos Barberis of SuperCharger and Huy Nguyen Trieu of the Centre for Finance, Technology and Entrepreneurship. In this course, we're going to begin by looking at the fundamental question. What is FinTech? And that is going to be module 1. For module 2, we'll turn to the next question which is money, payment and the transformation of finance through technology, looking at new things like cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin, blockchain as well as, mobile payments. In module 3, we'll turn to the digitization of finance and the development of new forms of alternative finance, crowdfunding, ICOs, new forms of lending and security settlement. In module 4, we'll turn to some of the bigger challenges, regulatory issues. How do we balance the opportunities and risks of FinTech so that we can make not only FinTech better but the financial system and the wider economy? In module 5, we'll turn to one of the biggest challenges facing the world of finance today and that is the interaction between data and finance and the emergence of an entirely new paradigm of data-driven finance which brings with it tremendous changes but also tremendous risks. And finally, in the last module, module 6, we'll look at a number of case studies to draw lessons from our experiences and also look at some of the big trends going forward. So, we very much look forward to you joining this in our journey across FinTech. At the end of this course, we very much hope you will have an overall understanding of what is FinTech, of some of the major technologies that are driving FinTech transformation, an understanding of what is happening not only in developing markets but in particular, in exciting new emerging markets, particularly in Asia. And finally, that you will be able to understand in your own life, in your own career how technology could continue to transform finance in the future.

Module 1 introduces the evolution, context, opportunities, and challenges of FinTech. It highlights to students that FinTech should be defined by the user of technology as opposed to simply the fact of using technology (the Who not the What) so as to better understand why this industry is growing ever more rapidly and with it what opportunities and risks it creates.

Key Learning Objectives:
 [1] Understand how finance and technology have evolved and are transforming finance around the world.
 [2] Discuss key interactions between finance and technology over time, in order to better understand the developments which are taking place today and are likely to take place in the future.
 [3] Consider the broad spectrum of the financial sector and the way that technology is changing it faster than ever before, particularly with the explosion of new entrants, including startups, tech firms and emerging markets.
 [4] Consider both the opportunities as well as the potential risks of FinTech and the challenges it poses for policymakers.

1.2 FinTech Transformation
Hi there, very excited to be here. My name is Henri Aslanian and my passion and focus is the future of the financial services industry. And I'm very lucky to be able to do this in my academic life as an Adjunct Associate Professor here at the University of Hong Kong, where I teach the first FinTech university course in Asia. Also very lucky to be doing this in my professional life as the FinTech and RegTech leader here for Hong Kong for PwC. Very excited to be sharing about the latest developments going on in the broader FinTech space throughout this course. One question often pops up is that how come FinTech became such a big reality? What really caused the rise of FinTech? Well it's a very interesting question. Traditionally, actually as technology evolved banks were pretty good at also always keeping up with technology and in many cases, being some of the early adopters. But all of this really changed during the global financial crisis in 2008. During that time, banks and financial institutions were busy dealing with regulations, compliance, and other many regulatory enforcement situations that were taking place. Innovation became a very, very distant priority. But at the same time, some of the biggest game changing innovations that took place that have changed our lives took place. Think about Uber, WhatsApp, WeChat, or Airbnb, and many others that really changed the way customers ahead experience the services they were receiving in many industries, except financial services, and this gap was created between what financial institutions were offering to their customers and what customers came to expect. And this gap is what the FinTech industry wanted to tackle. And the FinTech industry wanted to tackle very many of the used cases that matched the pain points that were in this industry. However, it was not only the startups. And actually what we realised over the course of the years is actually some of the biggest gamechanging technological innovations took place not only by FinTech startups but by large technology firms. Think about firms like Amazon, or Tencent, or AntFinancial and many others who have started now looking at financial services. And in the future there's actually a big chance that some of the providers of financial services, at least the interface that clients will be using may be these large technology firms. So definitely an area to watch. And what are some of the advantages these large technology firms have over some of these startups? Not only do they have the funding, they have the backing, and the talent, and the pool, capital pool to actually support these new businesses, but to certain extent, they have the trust of consumers. Think about it, if you're happy to buy all your daily necessities on Amazon, or on Taobao, wouldn't you use them as well to actually, you know, buy insurance products? If you're actually using the Facebook Messenger to actually talk to your friends and family wouldn't you use them as well to send money to friends and family as well? Well, as you can see, it's going to be a very interesting ecosystem developing over the coming years not only with FinTech, but also by TechFin. Definitely an area to watch.

1.3 FinTech Evolution 1.0: Infrastructure
Finance and technology have been inextricably intertwined since the very beginning. If we look at the earliest days of finance dating back thousands of years ago, the initial impact of technology was in the context of building systems of keeping records of government finances or payments for taxes and agricultural production or building facilities and one of the first physical technologies to develop was money the simple coin or thousands of years later, not long after 1000 A.D., paper money. Money is a form of technology that allows us to psychically handle the ideas embedded in finance. So, if we think about financial technology, the history is very, very long indeed and in addition to coins, paper money, systems of writing or accounting, major points include the evolution of the joint stock company or the corporation, forms of financing like banking, or more recently, stocks, bonds, things that we would call securities or derivatives. Derivatives are financial instruments whose value derives from some underlying financial instrument but if we think of today's fintech, the modern period of fintech and financial technology begins around 150 years ago and we generally mark the date as 1867. Why 1867? 1867 was the date of the establishment of the first transatlantic telegraph cable. That transatlantic telegraph cable made instantaneous communication between the major markets of New York and London, or London and Paris, or even eventually several decades later, Shanghai, or Hong Hong, and London possible. This was the basic infrastructure that underlies all of today's not only financial technology but much of today's communications and media developments as well and it's somewhat ironic that in the past five years more undersea cable has been laid than in the entire previous 150 years combined. Why? Because more physical cables are necessary to handle the ever greater flows of data speeding around the world and underpinning the development of finance. Many would say that the period from the 1860s up to the start of the First World War was a first period of financial and economic globalisation much like the past 30 years or so from today. That period of financial and economic globalisation was underpinned by technological infrastructure like the transatlantic telegraph cable which in fact has been called the Victorian internet. Now, if we think about technological developments in financial services, probably our next significant milestone really comes during the Second War World. During the Second World War, significant effort spent particularly in the context of developing codes for secure communications particularly of military and intelligence operations as well as, significant efforts to develop systems to break those codes and it was this process of encoding and breaking codes that led to come of the groundbreaking thinking in computer technology and in fact, eventually in artificial intelligence or AI which is one of the most exciting developments happening in financial technology today. But it wasn't until the period after the Second War World as the world economy is rebuilding that we begin to see progressive development of those early computer technologies to eventually lay the ground work for the sorts of fintech and regtech developments which we see today.

1.4 FinTech Evolution 2.0: Banks 
The first era of modern fintech, fintech 1.0 was about building the underlying infrastructure that supports today's global financial markets. The second major era of the modern fintech evolution, what we call fintech 2.0, started in 1967. 1967 marks two very important dates in the evolution of finance and also technology. The first, is the establishment of the first ATM, the first automated teller machine by Barclays Bank in the UK. That automated teller machine allowed, over the next several decades, a transformation in the relationship that people had with money and with finance. The second, just as significant, is the launch of the first handheld calculator by Texas Instruments. The first handheld calculator was transformational in the way that finance, on a day-to-day basis operated And, of course, the handheld calculator is also the ancestor of today's smartphone, perhaps the transformative technology in the context of fintech. 1967 thus marks a period where we begin to see a process of digitization. Digitization is taking processes and systems, which were formerly analogue, analogue things like handwriting or physical calculation of money, and digitising them, transforming them into a digital environment. And from these early beginnings, we can see in global financial markets, three very significant trends that come together in today's global financial markets. The first, the late 1960s and early 1970s, the establishment of a series of domestic and international electronic payment systems. These payment systems allow large value payments to take place today on a real time basis, which underpins massive volumes of transactions around the world. From across border standpoint, perhaps the most significant of these is an organisation, which we'll turn to in module two, called SWIFT. SWIFT is an organisation, which provides protocols to enable communications between domestic digital payment systems. In addition to these developments in payments, we also see, in 1971, the establishment of NASDAQ. NASDAQ was the world's 1st electronic stock exchange. Today, there are almost no stock exchanges or other financial exchanges, which are not electronic. Basically, in the context of both payments, as well as, in stock and other securities markets, the process of digitization, which began in the late '60s and early 1970s, has fundamentally transformed the way these markets work, so much so that today, it is very difficult to find a human being actually trading securities with another human being in stock markets. At another level, if we think of today's global foreign exchange markets, markets in which people buy one currency, like the dollar and sell another, like the yen or the RMB, these markets today do approximately 5.5 trillion dollars a day, every day of the year in transactions and almost none of this takes place in the form of cash. It is almost entirely digital book entries taking place between the computer systems of major financial institutions. This process, however, is one that was in fact well established by the late 1980s. A major market crash occurred in 1987. That market crash today, our best explanation, is what is called programme trading. Programme trading involves preset computerised buy and sell orders, and so when stock prices drop to a certain level, this would trigger automatic selling by computer programmes, which would then trigger more price drops, triggering more sales and eventually resulting in our first major coordinated global market crash. Now, across the 1980s, we began with the origins of online banking in parallel to the emergence of the internet and certainly by the beginning of the 21st century, a number of banks already had over a million plus online banking customers, but today, we are waiting to see what will be the first financial institution with over a billion online financial services customers. If we think in terms of developments, we can think that 1999 marked a previous high. 1999 was the internet bubble, the dotcom crash and it highlights something that's very important in the context of today's fintech. As human beings, we tend to overestimate the short term impact of new technologies and underestimate the long term impact of new technologies. After all, if we think to some of the 1999 internet bubble companies, companies like Amazon or Google. Certainly, at that time, we overestimated their short term impact, but looking back almost 20 years, almost no one would have imagined how significant Google, Amazon, and other similar sorts of technology companies have become. This period of building the digitization of the financial system hit a major turning point in 2008 with the global financial crisis.

1.5 FinTech Evolution 3.0 & 3.5: Startups & Emerging Markets
Fintech 3.0 and 3.5. 2008 marks a major turning point in the evolution of fintech. The global financial crisis of 2008 started in the subprime real estate markets of the United States and spread throughout the global financial system to major developed markets around the world, as well as, impacting developing and emerging market countries through the economic slowdown that from the standpoint of trade, was just as severe as the slowdown that we saw in the 1930s in the aftermath of the 1929 crisis. From the standpoint of fintech, the global financial crisis had a number of very important features. The first, was that it resulted in large numbers of job losses in the financial sector, particularly amongst younger people. This drove many of those people who had been looking forward to very good careers in the context of financial sector to seek to pursue other opportunities. And it's certainly the case today that if one meets someone who has just left a large financial institution, it is very frequently the case that they have gone to start a new fintech startup company. So, first impact of the global financial crisis, job losses forcing people in the financial sector to look for new opportunities. The second was that a reaction to the global financial crisis involved large numbers of regulatory changes designed to prohibit or prevent the sorts of problems that emerged in 2008 from happening again. These massive amounts of regulatory changes resulted in a dramatic decrease in profitability of financial institutions as well as massive increases in compliance and regulatory cost for those institutions. In many ways, the only way that these new requirements could be addressed was via technology. The third impact of the global financial crisis really was to speed up something, which was already happening, which was a loss or a drop in trust in traditional financial institutions. Since 2008, certainly amongst people under 35, it is now generally recognised that they would be more comfortable doing financial transactions with a technology company, whether Facebook or Alibaba or Tencent or Google than with a traditional financial institution like HSBC, Barclays or Bank of America. These features together along with one other important point and that important point is marked by 2007. 2007 was the launch of the first iPhone. The iPhone, of course, has now sold over a billion around the world and the iPhone and other forms of smartphones combined with other factors resulting from the global financial crisis set the stage for the transformation in fintech, which we're seeing today. Now, if we think about this combination, the combination has led to an explosion in startups. One very high profile startup is perhaps one of the most unique and one that we'll turn to in module two, Bitcoin and other forms of cryptocurrency based on blockchain or distributed ledger technologies. Others have involved various forms of alternative finance like P2P lending, peer-to-peer lending, or forms of crowdfunding, a range of different payments. But in fact, startups in the context of fintech are even not new. If we think back to 1999, one of those internet bubble startups was a company called PayPal. PayPal today is one of the world's most significant payment services providers along with traditional firms like Visa or MasterCard or even before that, Bloomberg. Bloomberg today is the world's most valuable private information services firm. Bloomberg founded by the former mayor of New York City, Michael Bloomberg, started in 1981. Bloomberg started in technology in an investment bank called Salomon Brothers. The technology that he developed was a secure communication service that still underlies the vast majority of cross border transactions around the world. So, this period of fintech 3.0, the explosion in startups since the global financial crisis is new in terms of numbers, volume, transformative potential but we have seen fintech startups before. The other area where the transformation has been perhaps even more dramatic is in the context of developing countries and emerging markets. 2007 marks the launch of Impesa. Impesa is a mobile phone-based payment system, which transformed access to finance of a large portion of the population of Kenya and it's when we combine these ideas of mobile payment with the smartphone that we see the transformation of financial services that is taking place particularly in China with Alibaba, Tencent and others.

Industry Showcase: Collaboration between Financial Institutions and Startups (The FinTech Association of Hong Kong)
Collaboration plays a very important role in the way FinTech has developed in the last few years, in particular, in Hong Kong. Initially, we saw a lot of work done by FinTechs trying to do it on themselves, looking to disrupt financial services and also the banks at one stage, looking to be more guarded about how they use technology, especially FinTechs with them. But as the reality dawned in the markets, such as Hong Kong, which is largely business-to-business, people realised that there needs to be a lot of collaboration. Banks need a longer time for transformation, but they also need to be able to be more agile with regards to adopting new technologies, and for FinTechs, they don't have a long runway, and secondly, they also aren't able to have the required capital if they want to face off with banks, in particular, where larger creations are impacted. So, it's quite important that collaboration is done in this field. Secondly, what we are seeing now is banks are not just collaborating with FinTechs, but they're going a step ahead and some of them are acquiring them through strategic investments. So, they'll have a large investment, and these FinTechs are solving just the banks' need for strategy in Hong Kong or across the region. Three, very importantly, is cross-regional collaboration. So, you see certain strands of different FinTechs in different regions, and what banks are trying to do is try to find these FinTechs here. If you have a FinTech which is very strong in the B2B section of AI in Hong Kong, they look to use that from Hong Kong, and they might use another coming in from Singapore. So, it becomes very important for them to have teams that can collaborate this. Lastly, it is very important that compliance plays a role in making this effort of collaboration between banks and FinTechs faster. Onboarding is a very important factor and of compliance, time can be shortened. It gives the start-ups more time to present a POC and be onboarded with the banks. So, collaboration plays an important role, and we should be aware that banking is going to change not by disruption, but through collaboration.

https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:HKUx+HKU_08x+1T2030/courseware/f824d15248b748ad9aa2028cb2b7536b/97d5ce06ae4b4ce9a7c333ed76d7150f/?child=first